Project Context and Objectives:
The key concept behind this proposal is the development of a very high resolution and high efficiency brain dedicated Positron Emission Tomograph (PET) imager that can visualize neurotransmitter pathways and their disruptions in the quest to better diagnose and consequently to better treat schizophrenia. In addition, the plan is for this compact PET imager to be integrated with a Magnetic Resonance Imager Radio Frequency (MRI RF) system to be able to operate as a brain insert in a hybrid imaging setup with practically any MRI scanner.
From the technical point of view, we propose to optimize the PET technology for imaging of the human brain with the accuracy typically achieved for small animal brain imaging. To achieve this, we will incorporate the solid state based MRI-compatible PET modules that will be designed to achieve below systemic 1mm spatial resolution in a tomographic reconstruction of the human brain.
We aim to achieve the level of PET-MRI compatibility allowing for simultaneous PET and MRI imaging. By combining PET measurements of neurotransmission with fMRI (functional MRI) measurements of Blood Oxygen Level Detection (BOLD) signal changes we will advance to a position where it is possible to learn more about the neurochemical determination of neural activity reflected in BOLD signal changes.
The novelty is that both the PET and RF coil systems are integrated into a portable and compact design dedicated to brain examination. This will allow current MR equipment to be easily upgraded into PET/MR systems.
To achieve its diagnostic goal, MINDView will be paired with the set of dedicated specific PET imaging agents and endogenous compounds that will be labeled with short-lived positron isotopes. The goal is that dopaminergic, glutamatergic and other pathways will be able to be studied with the new high performance imaging tool. Innovative paradigms such as activation and perturbation and their impact on brain function will be in focus.
Project Results:
During this reporting period the most significant achievement in the detector area is the realization of the new SiPM device by SEN which have been tested under magnetic fields to be MR compatible, high extremely low count rates of 33 kcps/mm2 at the breakdown voltage of 24.5 V, only increasing to less than 70 kcps/mm2 at typical working voltages of 30 V. In addition to this SiPM development, it has been possible to define the geometry of the first PET prototype formed by 3 rings of 20 detectors with an aperture of about 330 mm, with the RF coil at a diameter of 270 mm. A titled head support with 15º angle helps to position the patient within the RF coil and PET. It has been also possible to reach the expected detector block intrinsic resolution of about 1.5 mm in center of the crystal only exceeding to 3 mm on the crystal borders of the first crystal layer (DOI resolution about 2 mm).

On the Electronics WP there have been two major results to be highlighted, the first is the decision to not develop a specific ASIC but an analog row and column readout. It has been clearly shown the convenience to carry out this idea with the obtained results.The second main achievement is the successful design of the ADC with 66 channels 12 bit each. Its design has been finalized and tested with different configurations.

An RF design consisting of two concentric 20 edge glassfiber reinforced epoxid tubes has been performed. The RF shield diameter maximum dimension is fixed at 330 mm due to the constraints from the PET detector. The parameters length of the RF shield, length of the coil as well as diameter of the coil were stepped through in order to get the best pos-sible design based on the definition maximum B1 transmit field per Watt while still maintaining sufficient space for the human head.

Within the MindView project, a collaboration between Bencar (BC) and Karolinska Institute (KI) has been carried out around the chemistry development of the molecular probes. In this part of the MindView project we are aiming for tracers to be able to measure dopamine and serotonin receptors. The idea has been to develop these tracers with properties to be able to sense a potential release of the endogenous neurotransmitters like dopamine and serotonin respectively.

At the clinical and pre-clinical validation Workpackage, UU has carried out development of in-vivo models for schizophrenia, or more specifically, mouse models with deficient responses in the pre-pulse inhibition test. The idea is to investigate such models with PET to evaluate the homeostasis of endogenous neurotransmitters like dopamine and serotonin. The monoamines and acetylcholine are well-known neurotransmitters with profound effects on multiple neurons, and which are essential for normal behavior and mental health. UU recently reported that the orphan transporter SLC10A4, located in aminergic pre-synaptic vesicles, exerts a regulatory role in monoamine homeostasis. Mice lacking SLC10A4 were hypersensitive to psychostimulants including amphetamine, while indifferent to direct inhibitors of presynaptic and vesicular dopamine transporters.

While the tema at Karolinska Institute (KI) thematically focus on psychiatric diseases such as schizophrenia, TUM put focus onto neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Age-associated neurodegenerative disorders are accompanied by brain atrophy and vascular lesions, which substantially complicates accurate PET measurements and thus challenge the MindView system under the construction. As primary study at the TUM, they have imaged tau proteins, a pathological feature of AD, in patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia due to AD. Currently, an application for the local ethics committee is under preparation.
Potential Impact:
MindView will be a real breakthrough in terms of new tools for imaging that will allow the definition of parameters allowing patient stratification in schizophrenia and depression diseases. This should also lead in the future to development of the next generation of drugs for treating those disorders. Furthermore, the new tools developed will allow for an extension of techniques that are currently only available to very few hospitals.

The significance of this project is substantial. Neuropsychiatric disorders affect a large part of the population, and cause a great deal of suffering both to the patients and to those close to them. The cost to society is substantial. A three-year study covering 30 European countries - the 27 European Union member states plus Switzerland, Iceland and Norway - and a population of 514 million people, looking at about 100 illnesses covering all major brain disorders (including depression and schizophrenia, concluded that Europeans are plagued by mental and neurological illnesses, with almost 165 million people or 38 percent of the population suffering each year from a brain disorder.

Mental disorders are on the rise in the EU. Depression is already the most prevalent health problem in many EU-Member States. More specifically, the prevalence of schizophrenia and depression in year 2005 were 0,8% (3,7 million) and 6,9% (18,4 million), whereas in year 2011 were 1,2% (5 million) and 6,9% (30,3 million), respectively.

Current PET/MRI systems are very expensive, only affordable by well-financed health centres. The MindView project aims to develop a new system to be marketed as an upgraded dedicated RF coil to the head examination. This will trigger an expansion of PET/MRI technology around the World. The sensitivity of current PET scanners is of the order of 1% (1,5% in the Siemens mMR). This feature, together with the lack of clinical availability of specific tracers, does not allow the repeated examination of the same patient in a safe way (large radiation dose). The sensitivity of the MindView system will increase at least three fold, allowing a dose reduction and therefore safe longitudinal studies (repeated examinations on the same patient). Moreover, the resolution of commercial clinical PET scanners is of the order of 4-6mm (4mm in the Siemens mMR), which does not allow the visualization of critical brain structures. However, the resolution of the MindView PET scanner will be submilimetric, allowing the visualization of the amygdala and raphe nucleus, critical information in the diagnosis of schizophrenia and depression.

This project also aims to reduce a radiopharmacy lab to a fully automated tabletop mini clean room able to synthesize specific radiopharmaceuticals in monodoses when needed. The mini-clean room concept BLox is a new concept in order to produce PET tracers using novel microfluidic technology. The mini clean room is small in size and each tracer will be produced in a certified and logged clean room environment at each production occasion to reach cGMP-requirements.

Currently, 18FDG is used in most (in 95% of the cases) PET examinations. No specific tracer allowing the study of neurotransmitter pathways are being used regularly for diagnosing mental disorders. In MindView more specific radiopharmaceuticals will be developed and validated for its use in routine examination of schizophrenia and depression. Moreover, innovative infusion protocols, based on continuous injection, will be validated and standardized, allowing the study of neurotransmitter displacements while performing activation paradigms.
List of Websites:
www.mindview.i3m.upv.es