In most societies today there is a prevailing pressure to be thin. Thin is in and this means that being thin is equated to being beautiful, fashionable and accepted. Thus it is not surprising that the aetiological studies on anorexia and bulimia confirm that certain personality characteristics such as perfectionism and compulsivity are contributing risk factors. In fact, one of the three main areas of the studies involved the environment that, more specifically, constitutes self-esteem and personality.

In order to reach this conclusion, a hypothesis was formed claiming that neuropsychological impairment reflects the behavioural and personality characteristics of obsessive-compulsive types. In short, psychological processes have a physiological base. Thus, a model comprised of a collection of neuropsychological tests that involved measuring different aspects of cognitive inflexibility was designed. The tests were divided into three parts. In the first part, three groups were tested using a collection of tests. The groups included people with severe cases of anorexia and bulimia nervosa as well as a healthy comparison (control) group. Cognitive dysfunction was found to be a common feature of anorexia nervosa.

The second part consisted of patients with severe anorexia nervosa in comparison to patients of the same disorder after their weight levels had been restored. They were also compared to patients who were fully recovered and without symptoms for at least a year. Patients who had recovered showed better performance than those who were severely ill. Yet, compared to the control group, their cognitive performance was much lower.

The performance on selected cognitive tests as related to obsessive-compulsive characteristics including those in childhood before an eating disorder began. Once again a correlation was found indicating a vulnerability factor for eating disorders.

The model developed emphasises the correlation between eating disorders and serious cognitive impairment and neurological disorders. This brings forth new areas for therapeutic intervention that along with further joint research and development will lead to improvements in preventative measures and treatment.